JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour"
tonight: in the hot seat.
FBI Director James Comey
defends his decision to
reopen an investigation
into Hillary Clinton's
e-mails, days before last
year's presidential election.
Then, bridging the
health care divide.
Republicans try to win over
no votes in their own ranks by
putting more money on the table
to cover those with
preexisting conditions.
And in our final report from
South Sudan, how violence
against women is being used as
a weapon of war.
WINNIE BYANYIMA, Oxfam
International: They told
me that: We long for peace.
We want to be able to
walk freely and farm
and feed our families.
But the solution lies in
resolving the conflict.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: A tense time
today for the man who runs the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
James Comey spent hours before
the Senate Judiciary Committee
rejecting criticism that
he has mishandled
investigations of Hillary
Clinton or Donald Trump.
Lisa Desjardins has the story.
JAMES COMEY, FBI Director: I
have lived my entire career
by the tradition of that, if
you can possibly avoid it, you
avoid any action in the run-up
to an election that might have
an impact, whether it's
a dogcatcher election or
president of the United States.
LISA DESJARDINS: But, today,
FBI Director James Comey
faced the charges that he did
impact the 2016 presidential
election, when he sent this
letter to Congress on October
28, 11 days before Election
Day, revealing new steps in
an investigation into Hillary
Clinton's e-mail practices.
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D),
California: I have one
question, and I view
it as a most important
question.
LISA DESJARDINS: Ranking
Democrat Dianne Feinstein
asked today why he broke
normal FBI protocol.
JAMES COMEY: I could
see two doors, and
they were both actions.
One was labeled speak, and
the other was labeled conceal.
Look, this was terrible.
It makes me mildly nauseous
to think that we have had
some impact on the election.
But, honestly, it wouldn't
change the decision.
Everybody who disagrees with
me has to come back to October
28 with me, and stare at this
and tell me what you would do.
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: You
took an enormous gamble.
The gamble was that there
was something there that
would invalidate her
candidacy, and there
wasn't.
LISA DESJARDINS: Democrats
also pointed out that Comey had
been silent at the time about
the ongoing investigation into
Trump campaign ties to Russia.
He argued there was a
difference, that he had
previously told Congress
the Clinton probe
was closed and he
needed to reverse that.
And he insisted to Hawaii
Democrat Mazie Hirono
that he was impartial:
JAMES COMEY: I wasn't thinking
of what effect it might have
on a political campaign.
SEN.
MAZIE HIRONO (D), Hawaii: I
find that hard to believe that
you didn't contemplate that
there would be political
ramifications to your comments.
And I'm just wondering why...
JAMES COMEY: I knew there
would be ramifications.
I just tried not
to care about them.
LISA DESJARDINS: Texas
Republican John Cornyn
defended Comey and
pointed back at Clinton.
SEN.
JOHN CORNYN (R), Texas: You
are not the one who made the
decision to handle classified
information on a
private e-mail server.
LISA DESJARDINS: The hearing
was full of other news as well.
Lindsey Graham of South Carolina
pressed Comey on Russia.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: Is it fair to say
that the Russian government is
still involved in
American politics?
JAMES COMEY: Yes, well,
certainly, in my view,
the greatest threat of
any nation on Earth,
given their intention
and their capability.
LISA DESJARDINS: And on
issues of privacy, Comey said
encryption has blocked the FBI
from getting data off devices
in nearly half its cases.
JAMES COMEY: None of
us want backdoors.
We don't want access to
devices built in, in some way.
What we want to work with
manufacturers on is to figure
out, how can we accommodate both
interests in a sensible way?
LISA DESJARDINS:
One more hot topic?
President Trump's proposed
ban on immigrants from
some Muslim countries.
Vermont Democrat Patrick Leahy:
SEN.
PATRICK LEAHY (D), Vermont: Does
that make America less safe?
JAMES COMEY: Senator, thank you.
I'm not going to comment on
the particular statement, but
I do agree that a perception
or reality of hostility towards
any community, but in this --
particularly the Muslim American
community, makes
our jobs harder.
LISA DESJARDINS: As for his
own job, Comey's 10-year
term runs out in 2023.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins at the U.S. Capitol.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: The U.S. House of
Representatives easily approved
a compromise bill to fund the
government through September.
That's the end of
this fiscal year.
It totals $1.1 trillion, and
it includes an increase in
defense spending, but it ignores
several other of President
Trump's priorities, including
money for a border wall.
Leaders on both sides
praised the rare example
of cooperation between
Republicans and Democrats.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House: This is a
bipartisan piece of legislation.
And so each side doesn't get
everything they want, but we
are able to come together and
find a package that advances
many of our important goals.
REP.
STENY HOYER (D-MD),
Minority Whip: Democratic
members' participation
is absolutely essential
if we're going to pass fiscal
bills and appropriation bills.
And I'm glad that the Republican
leadership and negotiators
came to that conclusion and
worked with us to advance
this omnibus to the floor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The legislation
now heads to the Senate for
approval before this week is
out.
A revised Republican plan
to repeal and replace
Obamacare gained key
endorsements in the House
today.
Moderate Republican Fred Upton
and conservative Billy Long
said they will support the bill.
They spoke after meeting
with President Trump
on their amendment to
help cover people with
preexisting conditions.
REP.
FRED UPTON (R), Michigan: He
said that this bill would be
just as strong on preexisting
illnesses as Obamacare.
I want him to keep that pledge.
This amendment allows that to
happen, and cover those that
otherwise might have been
excluded.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The amendment
adds $8 billion to the
bill over five years.
Leaders of the House
conservative Freedom
Caucus endorsed the
proposal, and said that
the vast majority of their
members will support it.
But as of the time we
went on the air, no
vote has been scheduled.
In Eastern Missouri, another
wave of heavy rain is adding
to a flood emergency that's
already claimed five lives.
The swollen Meramec River neared
an all-time high in suburban
Saint Louis today, damaging
200 homes and threatening
some 1,500 more.
Parts of two interstate highways
are also underwater, and a
section of the Mississippi
River is closed.
The U.S. Justice Department
confirmed today it will not
charge two white policemen in
the killing of a black man
in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Cell phone video from last
July showed Alton Sterling
pinned, but struggling.
One officer yelled that
he was reaching for a
gun, and then he shot him.
In Baton Rouge today, U.S.
attorney Corey Amundson said
there are no solid grounds for
a civil rights violation.
COREY AMUNDSON, Acting U.S.
Attorney: After an exhaustive,
almost year-long investigation,
all of the prosecutors and
agents involved in this case
have come to the conclusion that
insufficient evidence exists
to charge either officer with
a federal crime in connection
with this incident.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The attorney
general of Louisiana says that
he will now investigate whether
state criminal charges should
be filed against the officers.
North Korea confirmed
today that it has detained
another American citizen.
State TV said that Kim Sang
Dok, an instructor at Pyongyang
University, was picked up on
last month.
He is accused of acts aimed at
overthrowing the government.
Kim is now one of
three Americans being
held by the North.
President Trump's America-first
policy means that human
rights will not determine U.S.
relations with
foreign governments.
Secretary of State Rex
Tillerson took that message
to his employees today.
He said that, in some cases
-- quote -- "If you condition
our national security efforts
on someone adopting
our values, it really
does create obstacles."
President Trump hosted
Palestinian leader
Mahmoud Abbas today,
and vowed to try to make
peace in the Middle East.
The White House meeting was
their first, and over lunch
in the Cabinet Room, Mr. Trump
said there's a very good
chance of getting a peace deal.
DONALD TRUMP, President
of the United States:
It's a -- something that
I think is, frankly,
maybe not as difficult as people
have thought over the years.
But we need two willing parties.
We believe Israel is willing.
We believe you're willing.
And if you both are willing,
we're going to make a deal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
met with the Israeli prime
minister, Benjamin Netanyahu,
in February.
Former President Obama's
foundation has unveiled
the plans for his
presidential library and
civic center.
The site would cover 225,000
square feet along Lake Michigan,
on Chicago's South Side.
It includes a tower-like museum,
and other buildings, and it's
expected to cost at least
$500 million.
Wall Street made
little headway today.
The Dow Jones industrial
average gained eight
points to close near 20958.
The Nasdaq fell almost
23 points, and the
S&P 500 gave up three.
And Boston baseball fans are
trying to make amends to an
opposing player who faced racist
taunts.
Adam Jones of the Baltimore
Orioles spoke out after
Monday's game with the Red Sox.
Last night, Jones got an
extended standing ovation when
he came to the plate at Fenway
Park for his first at-bat.
The two teams play
again tonight.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the latest push by Republicans
to win support for a replacement
to Obamacare; in South Sudan,
rape used as a weapon of war;
a free press under threat
worldwide; and much more.
After fits, starts and failure,
Republicans in Congress are
aiming for a new amendment
to win over enough votes
to repeal and replace
the Affordable Care Act.
We get two takes now on
this latest legislative
back-and-forth from
both sides of the aisle.
We start with Representative
Mark Sanford, Republican
from South Carolina.
Congressman Sanford, thank
you very much for joining us.
So, you opposed the first
version of Obamacare
replacement back in March.
I believe your argument was
that it left too much of the
original Obamacare in place.
You apparently have come
around now to this new version.
Why?
REP.
MARK SANFORD (R),
South Carolina: It, in
essence, split things.
It left open the possibility
of federalism, which is to
say, we have historically had
a patchwork of different
states and different remedies.
Our founding fathers were so
intent on this idea of letting
states try different things
that they built it in, though we
had a population of about four
million people when our country
started.
So, I think what it does is,
it allows Vermont to go to a
single-payer system if Vermont
wants to do so, and South
Carolina can go to a more
market-based system, if it chose
to do so.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you know,
I'm sure, that today Congressman
Fred Upton and others worked
on an amendment, a proposal to
further change this new version
that would add more money
to cover those
people with so-called
preexisting conditions.
Are you confident, from what
you know, though, that this is
going to guarantee everybody
with preexisting
conditions coverage?
REP.
MARK SANFORD: Built into the
base bill is this issue of
guarantee issue, so that you
cannot be denied based on
a preexisting condition.
The question all along
has been, if a state opted
out and they chose to,
again, make alterations
on that front, which
this bill does allow,
what happens to them?
And that's why it's
been important that this
issue of a risk pool,
as Maine has done, was
built into the bill.
There is about $130
billion built into the
bill to that very effect.
And what has been talked about
here in the 11th hour is an
additional $8 billion based
on Fred Upton and a couple of
other folks' insistence, that
a little bit more money be
built in as a cushion
on this front.
But you're talking over $100
billion being built into the
high-risk pool to cover somebody
in the event that a state
opted out of this issue of not
preexisting condition, but the
idea of somebody being able
to be charged more based
on a preexisting condition.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I know this
can get really complicated,
and I'm going to try to keep
my question as
basic as possible.
Congressman, I'm sure you know
the American Medical Association
has come out today saying
they are still opposed.
They are worried that millions
of people are going to be left
out with preexisting conditions.
The AARP, retired
persons association, says
they're still opposed.
And the American Cancer Society
says they have taken a look
at this, and they say every
bit of history for anything
that looks anything like this
high-risk pool arrangement that
Congressman Upton has included
is going to be unaffordable,
is still going to leave too
many people out.
So, they can't
support it either.
REP.
MARK SANFORD: Well, one,
I would expect them to
say that as advocates.
And that is what
they're supposed to do.
I think that what we're
trying to include is that vast
unspoken group out there that
maybe hadn't gotten the
degree of media coverage,
small business people
across the state of
South Carolina or other states
in this country that have been
really struggling with the
limitation of coverage and
the increase in premiums.
In South Carolina last
year, premiums went up
by about 30 percent.
And so what we're trying to do
is to let insurance be insurance
for the preponderance of folks
that are in the individual
marketplace that have seen their
premiums rise dramatically,
while, at the same time,
covering folks that indeed have
a preexisting condition or have
been -- seen the consequence
of a horrendous accident.
And I think that that's
what this bill does.
It tries to cover both.
It does so imperfectly, as any
bill would, but I think it's
the best that we are going
to be able to see out
of this House at this
particular moment in time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You are saying
it does so imperfectly.
The doubters out there
are saying it still leaves
too many people with
preexisting conditions
who can't afford coverage
uncovered and people
- - people who would
then be in a vulnerable
position not able to
access health care.
REP.
MARK SANFORD: What I would
say to that is, that was not
the experience of what we saw
in Maine.
And I would ask people to look
at the risk pool that took
place in Maine and the degree
of coverage that it afforded
people indeed with preexisting
conditions, while simultaneously
bringing down the rate of
premium for, again, those small
business folks that don't have,
again, the kind of health
challenges that we see there
in the risk pool in Maine, or,
frankly, other states.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman,
is it the government's
responsibility to make
sure everybody has
health care coverage?
REP.
MARK SANFORD: I think
that that's a debate
that will be ongoing.
I think that -- you know, I
guess part and parcel to any
open and free society is this
debate between freedom on one
side and security on the other.
And I think that there is a
vital tension between those two.
So even if this bill makes
its way to the Senate and
passes there, even if it comes
back and is signed by
the president, based on
the conference report
that got signed off
on in this House, even that
happens, this is a debate that
is going to be ongoing, because
I think that that tension
between security and freedom is
one that fits in this debate,
as it does in so many
others here on Capitol Hill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman Mark
Sanford, we thank you very much.
REP.
MARK SANFORD: My pleasure.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
now, for a Democrat's
perspective, we are joined by
Representative Kathy Castor
of Florida.
Congresswoman Castor, I think
you were able to hear what
Congressman Sanford is saying.
Do you believe that what
the Republicans appear
to be coming together
on does now cover enough
Americans?
REP.
KATHY CASTOR (D), Florida: No.
And the next 24 hours are
going to be very important for
families all across the country
that are concerned about their
health coverage, because what
we know about the Republican
bill is that it will rip
coverage away from millions of
Americans, raise costs, impose
a huge age tax on our neighbors
who are 50, 55, and older,
and not yet in Medicare.
And then it weakens the life of
the Medicare trust fund, just
at a time we have more baby
boomers retiring and
going into Medicare.
But here's the kicker for the
vote that could come up in
the next 24 hours, is the bill
has gotten even worse.
To round up the votes of the
Tea Party Caucus, Speaker Ryan
and the White House agreed to
go to the heart of the
Affordable Care Act, which was a
guarantee that no American could
be discriminated against
because they have a
preexisting condition,
like cancer or diabetes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
REP.
KATHY CASTOR: So, apparently,
this is going to be a
close vote tomorrow.
The phones are ringing off the
hook all across the Capitol,
because families understand what
is at risk, higher costs and
a fundamental return to the
bad old days where insurance
companies could
charge you anything.
And if you had a preexisting
condition, it was very
difficult to get coverage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let
me ask you about what
Congressman Sanford just said.
He said there are examples --
he kept citing the state of
Maine -- where they have created
these so-called high-risk
pools that allow money to be
put into one pool that people
who can't afford coverage, who
have preexisting conditions
would be able to access that and
get coverage.
REP.
KATHY CASTOR: Well, it's very
inefficient and very costly.
And this so-called Upton
amendment that has been floated
today to provide $8 billion to
states that go that direction is
-- would be wholly inadequate.
And, in fact, in my home state
of Florida, we have tried
high-risk pools in the past,
and the state never
stepped up to their
responsibility to fund them.
The feds here, I would
be very skeptical that,
under a Republican
Congress and this White
House, they would say, yes,
it's important to provide
billions of dollars for that.
At the same time, remember,
under this bill, they
decimate Medicaid services.
Those are the services for
our neighbors suffering
from Alzheimer's that
need nursing care, and
children, and the disabled.
So it's very difficult to see
how this is going anywhere.
In fact, you mentioned
the opposition from
the AMA and the AARP.
When you have America's
doctors, America's nurses, AARP,
the American Cancer Society
opposed to it, I'm surprised
it's even close right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
At the same time,
Congresswoman, you know
elections have consequences.
Republicans control the House.
They control the Senate.
They obviously control
the White House now.
What the Republicans are
looking at putting before
the House for a vote now
has made accommodations
toward the Democrats.
It does preserve some of
Obamacare, unlike what the most
conservative members of the
House want.
Doesn't there have to be
some sort of compromise?
And are Democrats not willing
to move at all on your own, as
Republicans have been willing
to do?
REP.
KATHY CASTOR: No, the Republican
bill goes to the heart of the
Affordable Care Act repeal
now.
They could make that argument
before, before they were talking
about gutting the protection
for preexisting conditions
and essential health benefits.
I mean, what good is an
insurance policy if you
buy it and you can't
go to the emergency
room and be covered?
But, yes, Democrats, we're
willing to work on the high
cost of pharmaceuticals.
I would really like to get to
the heart of the matter of how
we encourage greater competition
in areas of the country that
do not have competition.
There are a lot of great ideas,
and, hopefully, this will --
this new repeal effort will fail
tomorrow, and we can get down to
brass tacks, to improving what
works and fixing what doesn't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're
prepared with the idea that it
may pass, that the Republicans
may now have enough votes
among themselves to get
this through the House?
REP.
KATHY CASTOR: Boy, they're
really trying to ram it through.
The White House and Speaker Ryan
have really been twisting arms.
That's what I'm hearing from my
colleagues here in the Capitol.
But we have the American people
on our side, in addition to
America's doctors, nurses,
so many advocates.
But this next 24 hours
will be critical.
And there's no other issue that
touches every American family,
every small business owner.
So, this is critical.
And time is of the essence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're
absolutely right about
it touching everybody.
Congresswoman Kathy Castor,
thank you very much.
REP.
KATHY CASTOR: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This week, we
have reported on the civil war
in South Sudan and the famine
it has partly caused.
Tonight, a brutal, often
unseen side of this
conflict: an epidemic of
rape, used as a weapon
of war against South
Sudan's women and girls.
With the partnership of the
Pulitzer Center on Crisis
Reporting, here again is special
correspondent Jane Ferguson.
And a warning: Parts of
this story are disturbing.
JANE FERGUSON: The women
gathering in this small building
all have one thing in common:
a brutal experience that
binds them together.
LINDA, Rape Victim (through
translator): When I got off the
bus, they grabbed me and took
me to a small house by
the side of the road.
Then, 10 of them raped me.
JANE FERGUSON: Linda, not
her real name, was kidnapped,
beaten, and raped last year by
government soldiers on
the streets of South
Sudan's capital, Juba.
At this International Rescue
Committee support center, she
meets with others like her.
Were they wearing uniforms?
LINDA (through translator): Yes.
JANE FERGUSON: All of them?
JANE FERGUSON: Were
they carrying weapons?
LINDA (through translator): Yes.
At first, they told us they
were going to shoot us and
kill us, so we were afraid.
Then they beat us and raped us.
JANE FERGUSON: She was
taken with six other women.
Two of them were
never seen again.
She lives with around 30,000
others in this cramped camp for
people fleeing ethnic violence.
It's a huge, fortified slum in
Juba where U.N. peacekeeping
soldiers provide a little
security.
When South Sudan's civil
war broke out in 2013,
it quickly became fueled
by tribal divisions.
President Salva Kiir
of the Dinka tribe,
pitted against his vice
president, Riek Machar, from
the Nuer tribe.
Dinka government soldiers
have been fighting rebels, led
mostly by the Nuer tribe, all
across the country.
Both sides are accused of
taking part in war crimes,
one of those crimes, rape.
It has become a tool
of war here, used with
barbaric consistency, a
ruthless form of collective
punishment against rival tribes.
Gang-raped by soldiers,
this young mother of four is
now eight months pregnant.
WOMAN (through translator):
This is the result of tribalism.
If it wasn't, then the
fight would be between
soldier and soldier.
But now they do this to women.
They are raping women because
our husbands are not here.
They are rebels away fighting.
When they were raping
me, they kept calling
me a Nuer and a rebel.
JANE FERGUSON: Soon, she will
have yet another child to care
for, in this desperate poverty.
The International Rescue
Committee helps these
women, assigning social
workers to keep them
going long after the
physical scars fade.
Yet, even here, there is
no guarantee of safety.
In a war where sexual violence
is so prevalent, camps like
this are essential to providing
some sort of
protection for women.
But it's not really enough.
The women here know that,
the moment they leave this
camp, they're at risk of being
raped.
Last July, fighting
broke out in the capital
between government
troops and rebels, and
very little food was
making it into the camp.
In desperation, mothers were
forced to venture out, searching
for something to feed their
families.
Just a few yards from the
camp gates, this woman was
grabbed, tied up, and violently
assaulted.
WOMAN (through translator):
The children didn't have
anything to eat for four days.
So, I decided to go
outside and look for food.
I at least had a small
amount of money to go
outside and buy something.
I went to the market,
but when I was coming
back, they grabbed me.
They tied my hands
with a piece of cloth.
Then, they raped me.
JANE FERGUSON: According
to women like her, rape
here is often committed
by gangs of government
soldiers.
WOMAN (through translator):
Six of them raped me, and
then I lost consciousness.
They left me by the road, and
some people came and found
me and carried me back to the
camp.
JANE FERGUSON: It is
an astounding fact that
most of the women in this
camp have been raped,
the U.N. says 70 percent,
the majority by government
soldiers and police.
None of the women we spoke to
for this story has dared leave
the camp since their assault.
WINNIE BYANYIMA, Oxfam
International: Women
who step out to look for
food for their children
get assaulted and raped.
So, they can't step out.
They told me that:
We long for peace.
We want to be able to
walk freely and farm
and feed our families.
But the solution lies in
resolving the conflict.
JANE FERGUSON: The rape crisis
in South Sudan is one that
often gets lost in the other,
more visible disasters
of famine and civil war
tearing this country apart.
Countrywide, it is not known
how many have been raped.
Women here often bury the
burden of their enormous
collective suffering silently.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson in Juba, South Sudan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomorrow, our
focus on South Sudan continues
with a look at what life is
like for refugees
fleeing the violence
into neighboring Uganda.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": is
mountaintop mining sacrificing
coal country's environment?;
and problems in the path
of Facebook as its grows
its users and influence.
But first: Sometimes, searching
for the truth is dangerous work.
Journalists around the
world at times risk
death or imprisonment
to inform the public.
Twenty-four years ago, the U.N.
General Assembly proclaimed
May 3 Press Freedom Day.
So, we mark this moment by
assessing where things stand.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's often
where you report that determines
the level of threat that a
journalist faces.
In Mexico, dozens have been
killed by cartels while
reporting on the drug trade.
In Turkey, it's the government
that's been cracking down,
closing newspapers and locking
up reporters.
And here in the U.S., it's more
of a rhetorical attack, with
accusations of fake news, and
the president questioning
the motives and
honesty of the press.
We look at this global
landscape now with Joel Simon.
He's executive director
of the Committee to
Protect Journalists.
Welcome to the "NewsHour," Joel.
JOEL SIMON, Executive
Director, Committee to Protect
Journalists: Great to be on.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's go
through some of these global hot
spots that we have been talking
about.
Your organization just put out
a report about Mexico and some
of the violence directed at
journalists there.
What's going on?
JOEL SIMON: What's going on
is, you have a country where
the government is effectively
unable to assert control because
violent forces are dominant.
And they are determining,
through violence, what the
people can and can't know.
They're killing journalists.
They're suppressing information,
and they often operate with
the complicity of the police
and local authorities.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In a
circumstance like that,
where you're talking
about basically criminal
organizations killing
journalists, what can
we, as the journalistic
community, do to protect
people in that environment?
JOEL SIMON: Well, I think,
first of all, we have to call
on the Mexican government.
They have a constitutional
obligation to ensure
that Mexicans are able to
exercise free expression,
that the press can
operate freely.
And, in fact, we have confirmed
a meeting tomorrow with the
president of Mexico, Enrique
Pena Nieto.
We released a report this week.
We met today with journalists
in Veracruz, one of the more
violent states in the country.
And we are going to call on
the president to do all within
his power to ensure that
those responsible for
these crimes are brought
to justice and not
protected and are not able
to operate with impunity.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean,
murdering journalists
is obviously one end of
a very awful spectrum.
At the other end of the
spectrum, we have other nations,
nations like Turkey, that are
trying to suppress journalism
in a very different way.
JOEL SIMON: Yes.
I think, if, in Mexico, the
problem is that you have a
very weak state that is unable
to assert authority and protect
the rights of its citizens,
in Turkey, you have sort
of the opposite problem.
You have a state that's becoming
increasingly autocratic, led
by a leader who has launched
a consolidated crackdown on
all of civil society, including
the media, following an aborted
coup.
But this is a long-term
trend in Turkey, the
sort of consolidation
and strengthening of
state power and the
suppression of critical voices.
And Turkey is actually
the world's leading
jailer of journalists.
There were 81 journalists in
jail when we completed our
annual census at the end of
last year.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Again, in
that circumstance, when you have
got a very strong government
doing this, is this the role of
other Western pro-journalistic
governments to put pressure
on Turkey to stop
this kind of behavior?
JOEL SIMON: Absolutely.
I think a very critical
voice is missing, and
that's the United States.
That's -- that's
President Trump.
And, certainly, the U.S. press
freedom record has not been
perfect, and certainly they have
not exercised this influence
as fully as they might, and
we have been critical of that.
But we think they have
tremendous influence.
The U.S. has been a defender
of these values, because they
represent values that are so
deeply essential to
our political system.
But President Trump has
welcomed to the White House
President El-Sisi of Egypt.
He said he was doing a fantastic
job, when, in fact, he's jailing
journalists, 25 journalists
in prison in Egypt.
He's rolled up out the
red carpet for President
Xi of China, dozens
of journalists in jail
there.
And he has failed confront
President Erdogan.
In fact, he's been quite
complimentary of Erdogan.
And so this is a key voice
on behalf of journalists
and press freedom that's
missing right now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's talk
a little bit about President
Trump in this country.
I mean, obviously, we still
have a very strong, a very free
and vibrant press in the United
States.
But the president, as you well
know, constantly is hurling
this accusation of fake news.
JOEL SIMON: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: He's
accused journalists of
being enemies of the people.
What do you make of
all that rhetoric?
JOEL SIMON: Well, I think
-- I think there are so many
ways to -- this has been a big
topic of discussion, and there
are so many things that I
think President Trump is trying
to achieve.
One is changing the subject
sometimes when there's
an uncomfortable story.
One is sort of rallying a base
that's -- that's - - that has
a very low -- low view of the
role of the media, and
they might be responsive
to that kind of criticism.
But I think -- but journalists
themselves, if you talk to
journalists in Washington,
they really don't like
this kind of language.
They're threatened by it
and are not at all sanguine.
But they're able
to do their job.
They're able to resist this
kind of chilling pressure.
I think where the damage is most
acute is actually in the rest
of the world, where autocratic
leaders like Erdogan
in Turkey, or Sisi in
Egypt, feel emboldened
by this kind of framing
that journalists are
enemies, that journalists
provide fake news.
I mean, really, that's not
the way the leader of the
democratic world talks.
That's the kind of rhetoric you
hear from repressive leaders.
And so it's very disturbing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, do you
think in the end that this
may be a galvanizing moment
for the American press to have
-- to have this sort of very
aggressive attack from the
highest office in the land?
JOEL SIMON: Well, it's
galvanizing for the moment, but
I don't think we should declare
victory.
I think we have to
be very cognizant.
You know, it's a
war of words now.
And the words, you
know, can be resisted.
And journalists certainly
feel, you know, they
have a critical role.
They feel there's
more public support.
Ironically, every time the
president attacks the media, you
see subscriptions rise in the
media outlets he's attacking.
He's also obsessed
with the media.
So, journalists, bizarrely,
ironically, feel that they have
more influence in a certain
way, because the president
is watching or reading
everything they say.
So, you know, journalists don't
yet feel chilled by this kind
of speech, but I think there's
a real danger that this chilling
speech leads to policies,
and that those policies have
a real impact on the ability
of journalists to do their job.
And that's why we
need to be vigilant.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All
right, Joel Simon, Committee
to Protect Journalists,
thank you very much.
JOEL SIMON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
has pledged to revive the
coal industry, and has already
begun rolling back some
government regulations.
In one case, that means boosting
so-called mountaintop mining.
But even as many in coal country
applaud those moves, there's
concern over what it means
for the environment.
That is the focus of this week's
report from Miles O'Brien.
It's part of our weekly
series on the Leading Edge
of science and technology.
MILES O'BRIEN: Rocky
Hackworth is a coal miner who
makes a surprising claim.
ROCKY HACKWORTH, Mine Manager:
I'm a true environmentalist.
I work in it and live in it.
MILES O'BRIEN: And
he reshapes it.
He manages the 1,600-acre,
Four Mile Fork surface mine
30 miles south of Charleston,
West Virginia.
This is a state where the thick,
deep layers, or seams, of coal
are all but gone after 200
years of relentless
underground mining.
ROCKY HACKWORTH: Now, you got
a lot more of the smaller,
thinner seams that are on top
of these mountains.
Those areas have
already been mined out.
So, the surface mine was
just a natural progression.
MILES O'BRIEN: With a mother
lode of unnatural consequences.
In the hills of West Virginia,
surface mining carries a huge
cost, nothing less than the
mountains themselves, the
icons of this beautiful state.
CLAY MULLINS, Former Coal
Miner: They had everything here.
They had two or three
post offices, I think.
MILES O'BRIEN: Clay Mullins is
a former underground miner who
lives near a mountaintop removal
mine in Pax.
He endures the sound of daily
explosions and the destruction
of woods where he once hunted
and fished.
CLAY MULLINS: I think West
Virginians are sacrificing
too much of our mountains, our
wildlife.
Our wildlife really suffers.
I just don't like looking out
and seeing the mountains get
torn out the way they are.
MILES O'BRIEN: Ten percent of
the land in Central Appalachia
is now either active or
reclaimed surface mines.
EMILY BERNHARDT, Duke
University: The Central
Appalachian landscape
has been fundamentally
changed, and it's been
changed in a way that it's
not going to recover from.
Those mountains are
not going to grow back.
MILES O'BRIEN: Emily
Bernhardt is a professor
of biogeochemistry
at Duke University.
She's been researching
the decapitation of
mountains for seven years,
trying to understand
how it affects the
rivers and streams below.
EMILY BERNHARDT: The problem is
that for every about a meter of
coal, you have about 99 meters
of rock that you have to put
somewhere during this process.
And when you're in a landscape
like Appalachia, the place that
most of that rock ends up being
put is in river valleys.
MILES O'BRIEN: When the rock
is pulverized in the mining
process, toxic chemicals and
minerals locked inside
for millennia are released
and exposed to the
air, creating two areas
of concern.
EMILY BERNHARDT: One, that
the water coming out of these
mines is salty, it's full of
rock-derived salts, and that
by itself is stressful to
many freshwater organisms.
And the sort of subsidiary
problem is that that salt
contains lots of elevated levels
of trace metals, which have
known toxicity to organisms.
MILES O'BRIEN: But the
mining industry believes
that concern is overstated.
ROCKY HACKWORTH: This is a
good example of a ditch that
we have to build on top of a
valley field.
MILES O'BRIEN: Rocky
Hackworth showed me the
trenches and retention
ponds designed to capture
run-off and protect the
surrounding environment.
ROCKY HACKWORTH: That way,
you don't have anything that
is leaving the property.
Downstream, there's
no consequences.
We have had samples taken
now for eight years, and we
have never had a water issue.
MILES O'BRIEN: The coal
industry says it tests
water continuously.
Chris Hamilton is the senior
vice president of the West
Virginia Coal Association.
CHRIS HAMILTON, West
Virginia Coal Association:
It's not something that's
done haphazardously.
There's a very, very high
premium placed on that, and it's
a very important aspect, just
like personal and individual
mine health and safety.
MILES O'BRIEN: But the data
tells a different story.
We joined Emily Bernhardt's
colleague Eric Moore, as he did
some fieldwork near the largest
surface mine in
Central Appalachia.
Active for more than 40 years,
the Hobet mine has transformed
about 10,000 acres of natural
mountain peaks
into manmade mesas.
The Duke team presides over 14
different monitoring sites in
what appear to be clean mountain
streams.
They measure temperature, oxygen
levels and acidity, and they
also test the conductivity
of the water, a good indication
of the health of the stream.
In this case, the number
is more than 1,900
microsiemens per centimeter.
What does that mean?
ERIC MOORE, Duke University:
Well, compared to our natural
watersheds, they run around
150.
MILES O'BRIEN: In this mountain
stream, the conductivity is
similar to an urban waterway
filled with road salt
and other pollutants.
The only possible source here,
the chemicals unleashed when
the mountaintops are destroyed.
This is not a healthy stream?
ERIC MOORE: Correct, not at all.
MILES O'BRIEN: It looks good.
ERIC MOORE: Yes, looks fine.
MILES O'BRIEN: But it's not.
ERIC MOORE: No, not at all.
MILES O'BRIEN: In the final days
of the Obama administration,
the federal Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement published
a new rule designed to
protect streams like
this.
It would have prevented mining
companies from impacting the
hydrologic balance, forced them
to monitor the water during
mining, and mandated streams be
restored to their natural state
after the mining was over.
CHRIS HAMILTON: We saw
signs of every agency that
had any responsibility
over mining proposed
onerous rule after onerous rule,
which really served to restrict,
if not close down, a number
of mining operations here.
MILES O'BRIEN: But President
Trump has made some big
promises to help the coal mining
industry.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: And, for those
miners, get ready, because
you are going to be working
your asses off, all right?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: Thank
you, everybody.
Thank you.
MILES O'BRIEN: In February,
he signed legislation killing
the stream protection rule.
And the president is promising
more regulatory relief to
bring back mining jobs.
Are people optimistic
now here in coal country
in West Virginia?
ROCKY HACKWORTH: Very much
optimistic, 100 percent.
It changed the day
after the election.
MILES O'BRIEN: But scientists
believe surface mining is taking
a big toll, not just to the
mountains and streams, but also
to the humans who live nearby.
MICHAEL HENDRYX, Indiana
University: If you value public
health, this form of destruction
around people's community
should stop, and even if that
means that the mining companies
make less money or the coal
stays on the ground forever.
MILES O'BRIEN: Michael Hendryx
is a professor of applied health
science at Indiana University.
He has studied the health
effects of mountaintop removal
in West Virginia for 10 years.
He has documented high
occurrences of heart,
lung, kidney diseases
and some forms of cancer
among people who
live near mines.
But the mining
industry is skeptical.
CHRIS HAMILTON: There's
a segment of our culture
and society here that's
had some ill health
and some health effects,
and most of that has
been attributed thus
far to lifestyle,
diet, smoking and
things of that nature.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, Hendryx is
launching a new study designed
to factor out those other
causes.
He and his team will collect
detailed health data, along
with environmental exposures to
various toxins.
Participants will receive
passive air sampling
devices inside and
outside their homes, and,
on their wrists,
silicone wristbands
absorb certain toxins.
MICHAEL HENDRYX: We're trying
now to try to make those
connections more direct between
environmental conditions
in these communities
and the exposures that
individual people are
facing, and the health
consequences of those.
MILES O'BRIEN: The consequences
to the landscape and the
environment are more clear-cut.
At Four Mile Fork and
all other mines, federal
regulations require them
to sculpt and replant
the land that is mined out.
ROCKY HACKWORTH: These mountains
have natural resources that
God put there, and they were
put here for a reason, to be
used, and we're using them and
putting them back in place.
MILES O'BRIEN: But people who
live near a surface mine, like
former miner Clay Mullins,
say the landscape
is forever altered.
CLAY MULLINS: It all comes back
to that almighty dollar, because
that's what they care about.
And that's what they're in
business for, is to make money.
Now, everybody understands
that stuff, now, but you got
to draw a line between what's
good for the health of your
workers and what's good for
the health of the Earth.
MILES O'BRIEN: Wherever that
line in the sand was before, the
Trump administration is clearly
determined to move mountains
for the coal industry, even
as it does the same in Central
Appalachia.
In Kanawha County, West
Virginia, I'm Miles O'Brien
for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now questions
about the ever-growing
scope of Facebook's
empire and social network,
and whether the company
is embracing enough
responsibility for its reach.
Today, Facebook CEO Mark
Zuckerberg announced
that they will add 3,000
more people to monitor
live video, after problems
with violence and hate speech.
Hari Sreenivasan
takes it from there.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The decision
comes after a series of cases
where people shared live
video of murder and suicide,
recent examples, a murder in
Cleveland last month that was
posted live on Facebook, and a
man in Thailand posted video of
him murdering his 11-month-old
daughter.
It wasn't removed for 24 hours.
Once Facebook makes these
announced hires, there
will be 7,500 employees
to monitor thousands
of hours of videos
uploaded constantly.
Farhad Manjoo is a
tech columnist for The
New York Times who has
been closely covering
Facebook.
He joins me now to talk
about this issue and other
questions facing the company.
Farhad, so let's first
-- today's news, how
significant is this?
FARHAD MANJOO, The New York
Times: I think it's significant.
I mean, it's a significant sort
of step up in their ability
to monitor these videos,
and it should help.
The way it works is, there's
lots of videos going on,
on Facebook all the time.
If somebody sees something
that looks bad, that looks
like it may be criminal or some
other, you know, terrible thing,
they flag it, and the flagged
videos go to these reviewers.
And just having more of
these reviewers should make
the whole process faster.
So, it should help.
I mean, I think the
question is why it took
them a year to do this.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, put the
scale in perspective here.
If they have 1.2 billion active
users a month or whatever it
is that they talk about, even
at one-half of 1 percent, if
they wanted to harm themselves
and put this on Facebook,
that's six million people.
How do these 7,000 stop that?
FARHAD MANJOO: Yes.
I mean, the way that tech
companies generally work
is, they manage scale
by, you know, leveraging
commuters, basically.
There's a lot of kind of
algorithmic stuff that goes into
making sure -- they try to,
you know, cut down the
pool that the human
reviewers have to look at.
And there is some experience
in this in the Valley.
I mean, YouTube has had
to deal with this sort
of thing for years.
And the way they have
really come around to doing
it is a similar process.
Like, they have thousands and
thousands of hours of videos
uploaded essentially every
minute, and they count on kind
of the viewers to flag anything
that's terrible, and then
it goes to these
human reviewers.
So, it's a process
that can work.
The difficulty in Facebook's
case is, it's live video, so
they have to get it down much
more quickly.
And so, you know, it's possible
that they may need more people
or some other, you know,
algorithmic solution, but I
think this is a -- you know,
it should be an improvement
over what they have now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You
mentioned it took them so
long to get to this point.
Why?
FARHAD MANJOO: I think this is
a real sort of cultural blind
spot for Facebook in general.
Oftentimes, they go into these
projects -- you know, Facebook
Live is an example, but many
of the other things they
have done -- with, you
know, tremendous optimism.
As a company, and Mark
Zuckerberg as a technologist,
he has tremendous
optimism in technology.
And they often fail to see or
appreciate the possible kind of
downsides of their technology
and the ways that
it could be misused.
I mean, I think that what we
have seen with live -- with the
live video is a small example.
The way that Facebook has sort
of affected elections, the
way that -- you know, the fake
news problem we saw in the U.S.
election, the way it's been
used as a tool for propaganda
in various other parts of the
world, you know, those are huge
examples of, you know, what
looked like a fairly simple
solution technologically,
like we're going to
get everyone connected
and have them share the news.
You know, it brings some real
deep, like, social questions
that they are only lately
beginning to confront
in a serious way.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, this
combination of, I guess, an
optimism in the technology and
design and a faith in users
are ultimately good and will
make the right choice, I mean,
is that the sort of core
cultural concern or problem that
keeps the company making these
sorts of decisions?
FARHAD MANJOO:
That's part of it.
And the other thing to remember
is, you know, they're a
technology company, and speed is
of the utmost concern for them.
One of the things that was
happening in the tech industry
last year is that a whole bunch
of other companies were rolling
out live video systems, and
Facebook didn't want to be left
behind.
And so they created
their live video system.
And it became, you know,
the biggest, because they're
the biggest social network.
But with that sort of size
comes, you know, an increased
opportunity for misuse and more
power, right.
Like, a video on Facebook
that can be seen by, you know,
potentially much more people
has a lot more potential
for being misused.
And I think they -- it's not
right to say that they don't
consider those things, but
it seems like it's on
a back burner for them.
And I think what's happening
at Facebook is a shift toward
thinking about these issues
at an earlier stage.
And we have really seen
this more recently in their
work with the news industry.
I mean, after the -- after what
happened -- after what happened
in the election and the kind
of controversy about fake
news, they have started to --
they have rolled out a bunch
of initiatives to do
stuff to improve how
news is seen on Facebook.
They have added fact-checkers
and other things.
So, I think their attitude
is changing, but it may be
changing too slowly, compared to
how quick the technology
they're rolling out is changing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Farhad Manjoo of The New
York Times, thanks so much.
FARHAD MANJOO: All right, great.
Thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
"NewsHour" Shares, something
that caught our eye that may be
of interest to you, too.
It's springtime, and that means
it's peak tornado season in
the nation's Central Plains.
We recently spoke with one
Wisconsin researcher who thinks
modeling massive twisters with
supercomputers could
help save lives.
LEIGH ORF, University of
Wisconsin: My name is Leigh Orf,
and I am a scientist at the
University of Wisconsin.
I study thunderstorms.
Specifically, I study the
supercell thunderstorms
that produce the most
powerful tornadoes,
using computers
to simulate them.
Only a small fraction
of supercells produce
tornadoes, and only a
small fraction of that
fraction produce the
kind of tornado that
we're trying to study.
But the reason we are studying
it is because, if you think
of 2011 with Joplin, Missouri,
Tuscaloosa, Alabama, El Reno,
Oklahoma, these are the big,
long-track EF-5 tornadoes that
just do incredible amounts of
damage and, if people can't
get out of the way of those
storms, a lot of fatalities.
A computer model like the
one we're using essentially
emulates or simulates the real
atmosphere as faithfully
as we scientists know
how to make it work.
We use the equations of physics
to essentially grow a cloud
in a specific environment.
What goes into the model
are atmospheric conditions
of winds, temperature,
pressure, and humidity.
And from there on, it's
just -- the model just
integrates forward in time.
This sequence is designed
to give you a sense of
the scale of the storm.
And what's really striking
about this is, you can see how
small the tornado is, at least
with respect to the full storm.
But the reason I do this
is to give people an
understanding of how --
why we need supercomputers
to study this, because the
whole storm really needs to be
at this very high resolution in
order to capture the tornado.
This highlights the
streamwise vorticity
current, which is a feature
we have identified in these
simulations that seems to be
important to maintaining the
strength of the storm and,
therefore, the tornado.
These are just massless.
We call them parcels, air
parcels in meteorology.
If you are hanging out in
the streamwise vorticity
area where those yellow
parcels are, the tornado
is coming right at you.
They take a horizontal path,
and then they kind of go
tilted upward into the storm's
updraft.
Depending upon where you put
these source regions, you
can see the air is doing very
different things.
The red region is the
streamwise vorticity current.
The darker green region, this
is air that's in the cold
pool of the supercell, and it
seems to be directly
feeding the tornado.
The whole reason we do this
kind of research is essentially
to produce better forecasts
of when these things
are going to happen.
Too many people still die from
tornadoes in - - around the
world, but in the United States,
too.
We have a false alarm problem
where we issue a warning when
the tornado is not happening.
And then we have the problem
where the tornado is already
happening, but we haven't issued
a warning.
So, the challenge is to do a
much better job at producing
these warnings even before the
storm has formed.
And the first step is to
first understand the storm.
You can't forecast a storm until
you understand it, and we're
just getting to the point where
we're better understanding
what's going on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right now: Medicare
doesn't help pay for home-based
care, unless it's
requested by a physician
as medically necessary.
But even for people who
qualify, it can be a struggle
to get those benefits.
You can learn more
at our Web site.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Thursday, we head to
Janesville, Wisconsin,
to see how House Speaker
Paul Ryan's hometown
is doing after its largest
employer moved out.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.